---
title: "Focus Toolkit: Tools to Improve Your Focus & Concentration | Huberman Lab Podcast #88"
excerpt: "In this episode, I provide a list of behavioral, nutritional, and supplement-based tools you can use to improve your ability to get into a focused state to do mental or physical work. I explain science-supported strategies for transitioning into focus, maintaining focus during the work bout, and exiting the focus session, which is also critical, including decompression/defocusing tools. I explain when and how to use: binaural beats, caffeine, deliberate cold exposure, the pros and cons of working in fasted vs. fed states, and supplements and foods that enhance dopamine, epinephrine (i.e., adrenaline) and acetylcholine to promote optimal focus. Also, I explain how short behavioral practices, such as meditation and visual gaze training, will benefit your ability to focus over the long term. As deep focus is crucial to significantly improve cognitive or physical performance in any realm, this episode should be useful to anyone. By the end, you’ll have an essential toolkit of science-supported, low- to zero-cost focus and concentration strategies to select from that can be tailored to your physical and mental performance needs."
coverImage: "/assets/blog/focus-toolkit-tools-to-improve-your-focus-concentration-huberman-lab-podcast-88/cover.jpg"
date: "2022-09-05T05:35:07.322Z"
author:
  name: Huberman
  picture: "/assets/blog/authors/huberman.jpg"
ogImage:
  url: "/assets/blog/focus-toolkit-tools-to-improve-your-focus-concentration-huberman-lab-podcast-88/cover.jpg"
---

# Focus Toolkit 
- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast, where we discuss scienceand science based tools for everyday life. I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor ofneurobiology and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine. Today we are discussingfocus and concentration and tools for improving yourfocus and concentration. This is a topic thatI've covered previously on the Huberman Lab Podcast,but in different contexts. For instance, we had a verypopular episode on ADHD, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, which of course relatesto the topic of focus and how to improve focus. We've also talked a lot aboutdopamine motivation and drive. In fact, that's the title of your previous also quite popularepisode of this podcast, but never before have we had asingle episode solely devoted to the tools to improvefocus and concentration. The rationale for recording this episode is to provide people onelocation where they can go and quickly access the specific tools for increasing focus and concentration that are known to bethe most powerful tools and the most up to date tools. In fact, today's episode isgoing to include description of several peer reviewed studies and the tools that emerge from those scientificpeer reviewed studies that point to new, and fortunately, even briefer protocols than I've described before. So what I'm basicallydescribing here is tools that in a very short amount of time will allow you to significantly increase your focus and concentration abilities. Those tools will include behavioral tools, nutrition based tools,supplement based tools, brain machine interface based tools, and for those of you thatare working with a physician, prescription drug tools. Today's episode ought to benefit anybody, young or old or anything in between whether or not you have ADHD or not. Today's episode is going to give you tools that you can apply in your daily life, most all of them are completely zero cost and those tools will allow you to tap into the neurochemistry and the neurocircuitswithin your brain and body that peer-reviewedscience has reliably shown can significantly improve your focus and concentration abilities. Just to give you a little teaser of the kinds of tools thatI'm going to provide you on today's episode, a previous guest on theHuberman Lab Podcast was Dr. Wendy Suzuki. Dr. Suzuki is a professor ofpsychology and neuroscience at New York University, or NYUas it's commonly referred to. She's also the Dean ofArts and Sciences at NYU. Her laboratory made avery important discovery, which was that a very brief, just 12, actually 13 if you really count the intro, but 13 minute daily meditation performed for a periodof about eight weeks significantly increased people's focus andconcentration abilities. And the great news is youdidn't need all eight weeks, it was just that's how longthat you ran the study. So during today's episode, I will describe that protocol in detail. I'll also provide you an even briefer alternative to thatprotocol that you can use, if for instance, you find yourself with only three minutes or four minutes or five minutes a day to meditate. The great news is there'squality peer reviewed science to support that form of meditation for improving focus and concentration. And that falls under thebin of these zero cost tools that you can really use totap into the neurochemistry and neurocircuits that really allow you to take control of yourcognitive abilities and improve them over time. I'll also provide you important details about that protocol and other protocols. For instance, contrary to popular belief, it is not, I repeat it is not a good idea to do a focused based meditation within the four hours before bedtime. Many people, including some of thesubjects in that study performed by the Suzuki lab, found that when they did afocusing meditation protocol, even if it was very calming, it led to difficulties infalling and staying asleep. So that runs counter toa lot of what we've heard about meditation being great for sleep. It turns out meditationmight be great for sleep, it certainly is great forimproving focus capacity, but I highly recommend thatif you're going to apply a focus meditation tool in order to improve yourfocus and concentration, that you make sure that that's performed not within four hours prior to bedtime. So that's just a brief example of the sorts of tools and protocols and details about the tools and protocols that I'll provide on today's episode. I should mention thatwe have provided links in the show note captions so that you can quickly go tothe studies that we describe as well as some of the behavioral tools and other tools that we'll cover, things like the use of binaural beats, supplements, et cetera. Our goal here again is to provide you themaximum number of tools for focus and concentrationthat you can pick from and choose from and apply in your life and try to eliminate asmuch of the legwork required to seek out and apply those tools.

# Momentous Supplements 
I'm pleased to announce thatthe Huberman Lab Podcast is now partnered withMomentous supplements. We partnered with Momentousfor several important reasons. First of all, they ship internationally, because we know that many of you are located outside of theUnited States, that's valuable. Second of all, and perhaps most important, the quality of theirsupplements is second to none, both in terms of purity and precision of the amounts of the ingredients. Third, we've really emphasized supplements that are single ingredient supplements and that are supplied in dosages that allow you to build asupplementation protocol that's optimized for cost, that's optimized for effectiveness, and that you can add things and remove things from your protocol in a way that's reallysystematic and scientific. This is really hard to do if you're taking blendsof different supplements or if the dosages are suchthat you can't titrate, or that is adjust the dosages,of a given supplement. So by using single ingredient supplements, you can really buildout the supplement kit that's ideal for youand your specific needs. If you'd like to see the supplements that we partner with Momentous on, you can go to livemomentous.com/huberman. There you'll see those supplements. And just keep in mind that we are constantly expandingthe library of supplements available through Momentouson a regular basis. Again, that's livemomentous.com/huberman. Before we begin,

# Thesis, LMNT, Eight Sleep 
I'd like to emphasize that this podcast is separate from my teachingand research roles at Stanford. It is, however, partof my desire and effort to bring zero cost to consumer information about science and science related tools to the general public. In keeping with that theme, I'd like to thank thesponsors of today's podcast. Our first sponsor is Thesis. Thesis makes custom nootropics. And to be quite honest, I don't like the word nootropics because the translation ofnootropics is smart drugs. And as a neuroscientist, I can tell you there is no neural circuitin the brain for being smart. Rather, there are neural circuits that are responsible for focus, neural circuits for creativity, neural circuits, for taskswitching and so on and so on. Fortunately, Thesis understands this and has developed custom nootropics that are tailored to your specific goals and your specific needs. They use only the highestquality ingredients, things of the sort that we'lltalk about in today's podcast, things like Alpha-GPC, phosphatidylserine, ginko biloba, et cetera. However, I should mention thatthey are customized to you. So you can go to Thesis,take a brief quiz, and you can get a nootropic starter kit that will allow you totry various nootropics and determine which onesyou like and work for you and which ones don't. I've been using Thesisnootropics customized for me for close to six months now and can confidently say that their nootropics havebeen a total game changer. My go-to formula is the Clarity Formula, I like to use that before cognitive work, and I use the EnergyFormula before my workouts. To get your own personalizednootropic starter kit, go online to takethesis.com/huberman, take that three minute quiz and Thesis will send youfour different formulas to try in your first month. Again, that's takethesis.com/huberman and use the code Huberman at checkout to get 10% off your first box. Today's episode is alsobrought to us by LMNT. LMNT is an electrolyte drink that has all the things youneed and none of what you don't. That means the electrolytes, salt, magnesium, andpotassium are in there, but it does not have sugar. Electrolytes are key to cellular function, in particular neuronalor nerve cell function. In fact, for your nerve cells to be able to fire action potentials, those are the electrical signals that allow your brain and body to work and move and think,et cetera, you need sodium, a lot of people don't realize that. And while of course thereare people out there that need to reduce their sodium intake, these would be people withpre-hypertension or hypertension, many people actuallydon't get enough sodium, especially people that arefollowing low carbohydrate diets, drinking a lot of caffeineor eating extremely clean. Oftentimes, those people feel better when they increase their sodium intake and their health can actually improve when they increase their sodium intake. LMNT contains a sciencebacked electrolyte ratio of one gram of sodium, 200milligrams of potassium and 60 milligrams of magnesium. If you'd like to try LMNT, you can go to drinklmnt,that's l-m-n-t.com/huberman to claim a free elementsample pack with any purchase. Again, that's drink LMNT,l-m-n-t.com/huberman. Today's episode is alsobrought to us by Eight Sleep. Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers with heating, cooling, andsleep tracking capacity. The reality is thatsleep is the foundation of mental health, physicalhealth, and performance. Now I've talked before inthis podcast about the fact that there's a directrelationship between temperature and our ability to fall and stay asleep. In fact, our body temperature needs to drop by aboutone to three degrees in order to fall asleep and then there are furtherdecreases in our body temperature that allow us to get intothe deepest stages of sleep and the so-called rapideye movement sleep, all the aspects of sleep that really restore our brain and body. And then waking up actually involves a heatingup of core body temperature. By sleeping on an EightSleep mattress cover, you're able to control the temperature of your sleeping environment precisely. I've been sleeping on anEight Sleep mattress cover for many months now and I can tell you it hascompletely changed my sleep. I thought I was sleepingpretty well before and now, frankly, I don't even want to travel because I don't want to beaway from my Eight Sleep. I can't wait until hotels andAirbnbs include Eight Sleep. If you want to try Eight Sleep, you can go to eightsleep.com/huberman and check out their new Pod 3 Cover to save $250 off as aspecial Labor Day offer now through September 11th. Eight Sleep currently shipswithin the USA, Canada, and the United Kingdom. Again, that'seightsleep.com/huberman to save $250 off an Eight Sleep covernow through September 11th.

# The “Arrow Model” of Focus: Epinephrine, Acetylcholine & Dopamine
Okay, let's talk aboutfocus and concentration and how you can improveyour focus and concentration using science based protocols. Now because today's episodeis mainly focused on tools and not so much the underlying mechanisms, I'm mainly going to focuson what to do and when and how to do it. But I just want to takeabout three minutes and briefly describe a model, that is a visual image thatyou can put in your mind, that will help you incorporatethe tools that I'll provide and that generally willhelp you understand at a mechanistic level howfocus and concentration work. So what I want you to imagine is an arrow. And an arrow of course, has an arrowhead and it has the shaft of that arrow. And in the context of the neuroscience of focus and concentration, the neurochemical system that really representsthe shaft of that arrow, right, the straight line is epinephrine, also called adrenaline. And today, I'll refer to adrenaline andepinephrine interchangeably. Turns out that epinephrine/adrenaline are released within yourbrain from a little location, a little cluster of neuronscalled locus coeruleus, but you do not need to remember that name, and from your body fromthe adrenal glands. And the release of epinephrinefrom those two locations overall increases energy,it increases alertness. It does not alone increase focus, okay? So the reason I've assigned epinephrine, adrenaline as the shaft of the arrow is that if focus is the arrow, there is no focus without epinephrine. So things, whether or not they'rebehavioral or psychological or supplements or drugsthat increase epinephrine allow focus to occur, theyare necessary for focus, but they are not sufficient for focus, that is they are required but they are not enough to create focus. So we're going to needepinephrine in the equation. Without epinephrine, thereis no focus or concentration. Now the arrowhead on thismetaphorical arrowhead that represents focus and concentration is going to be represented or related to themechanisms of acetylcholine, a different neurochemical that also exists in the brain and body. In fact, in the body, it's responsible for the contraction andmovement of your muscles. But today, we're talkingabout acetylcholine not in that context, but rather in the context ofits release within the brain. Acetylcholine is released from a couple of differentlocations in the brain and the best way to think aboutit is it's like a spotlight. It highlights specificneurons, nerve cells that should be active, ormore active I should say, than the other neurons in the environment. So the reason I've assignedthe arrowhead to acetylcholine and acetylcholine to the arrowhead is that if you have an arrowwith a very big arrowhead that's really broad, really broad, imagine a mile wide arrowhead, that's not very focusedon any one location, it's not really pointingto any one location, is it? But with a narrow, reallytightly focused arrowhead, well, that's focused on one location. So we have alertness, epinephrine, and then we have the actual direction in which our concentrationand focus is placed, and that's, at least in this mental modelI'm creating, acetylcholine. And then in order to have ongoing focus, we need another neurochemical. And it turns out that thatthird neurochemical is dopamine, a molecule often associatedwith pleasure and reward, but it's really themolecule of motivation. So here, I want you toimagine in your mind, an arrow with an arrowhead, think acetylcholine in the arrowhead, a shaft or a line behind that arrowhead, which is epinephrinealso called adrenaline. And then behind it, a sort of an engine that keepsthat focus moving forward, right because we don't justwant to be focused for a moment, we want to be able to focusfor 10 minutes or for an hour or maybe even for two hours. Turns out there's anoptimal duration to focus, I'll teach you that in just a little bit, but these three neurochemicals together, acetylcholine, epinephrineand dopamine really allow you to get focused, to focus very precisely, and in fact, increasinglyprecisely over time to really narrow and narrowand narrow your focus progressively within asingle about of focus and to continue to do that and to be able to do thatrepeatedly whenever you want. So here, I'm purely talking in metaphor and in models and mental models of arrows, but in a moment or two, I'll start transitioningto discussing tools in which I'll talk about increasing dopamine and acetylcholine or increasing epinephrine and dopamine in various combinationswith various approaches. And what I'd like you to conceptualize is how those are contributing to creating a very narrowly pointed arrow that has the capacity to continue moving forward over and over so that you can focus assharply and as long as you like. And of course, for those of you that want to get really down in the weeds of how dopamine works, we have an entire episode about dopamine motivation and drive that really gets intoneurotransmitter release and dopamine baselines and thresholds and all of that sort of thing. We also have episodes on focus, much longer episodes,I should say on focus that incorporate a lot ofthe biology of acetylcholine. It turns out acetylcholineis also involved in neuroplasticity, et cetera, and epinephrine ofcourse, relates to stress and our capacity to dealwith and buffer stress and on and on. Those episodes are all available to you in their long form at hubermanlab.com, you can find them very easily. They are all timestamped so you can navigate tothe particular topics most of interest to you. I mention this all not as a diversion from what we want to cover today, but I know that some of you are hungry for a lot more mechanism, but today's episode is reallymainly focused on the tools, I will of course touch on mechanism, but if you really want to dothe deep dive on mechanism, go to hubermanlab.com and you'll have morethan you ever could want

# Modulation vs. Mediation, Importance of Sleep
about those mechanisms. Let's jump into the toolsfor concentration and focus. If you want to thinkabout tools of any kind to modify your biologyor physiology in any way, whether or not it's for cognitive function or you want to get better at exercising, or you want to build muscle, or you want to improve your hormones, you need to think and understand tools in the context ofmodulation and mediation. What do I mean by that? Well, it's quite simple really. Mediation is how specifictypes of chemicals and cells and circuits and organscontrol very specific things in your brain and body whereas modulation is the ability of chemicalsand cells and circuits to adjust how different things change, how different things workin your brain and body, but to do it more broadly. What do I mean by this? Let me give an example. For instance, I'm going to tell you now that one of the most important things to build and maintain yourfocus and concentration is to optimize your sleeping behavior, that is to get enough quality sleep I would say 80% of thenights of your life. Not everyone can get optimal sleep 100% of the nights of their life, nobody, truly nobody achieves that. However, sleep has been shown to relate to cognitiveperformance, physical performance, hormone output, and so many other things, including immune system function. What we can reliably sayis that sleep modulates just about every processin your brain and body. So you have to get great sleep. There is simply no toolthat's going to allow you to overcome chronic sleep deprivation and allow you to remain focused, no pill, no device, no supplement,no protocol whatsoever. There are tools to overcome one night or maybe two nights of sleep deprivation and we'll talk about those, but at a fundamental level, we need to do the things that modulate our focus andattention in powerful ways and sleep really is that thing. So we've done two episodes,one called "Master Your Sleep" and the other episodeis "Perfect Your Sleep." The "Perfect Your Sleep" is a little bit more like this episode, more focused on protocols. "Master Your Sleep" includesprotocols and mechanism. Again, you can findthose at hubermanlab.com. We also have a sleep toolkit, a distilled list of things to do in order to optimize your sleep. I highly recommend that you download that. You can go to hubermanlab.com, go to the Neural NetworkNewsletter, it is listed there. If you want you can signup for the newsletter, but you don't have to, you can simply downloadthe PDF of that toolkit for zero cost. Why do I say sleep modulatesfocus and attention? Well, I'll give an analogy. If right now someone pulleda fire alarm in this building or if we had a fire in this building, my attention would drift, it would not be on recording this podcast, it would be on something else. But would I say that the firealarm mediates attention? I mean fire alarms are notreally involved in attention. No, rather they modulate my attention. The noise in the roommodulates my attention. That's quite a bit different than a tool that I'll provide later

# Tool: Binaural Beats to Improve Concentration 
and I'll just give youa little hint of now, in fact, I'll give it to you now, which is that 40 HZ binaural beats have been shown in a numberof peer reviewed studies to increase focus and concentration. And if you'd like toaccess 40 HZ binaural beats in order to improve yourfocus and concentration, you can do that, you canactually get it at zero cost. You can go into the app store, for instance, the Apple App Store, this is also available for Android phone, there's an app called BrainWave, and you can go there,you can dial in 40 HZ and it'll play these binaural beats. It's been shown in multiplequality peer reviewed studies that playing a pattern ofsound waves to one ear, do, do, do, do, do, and the other ear, which isslightly offset in frequency, meaning not quite the same frequencies, so more like do, do, do, do, that that combination of frequencies played to the different ears, actually get integratedwithin deep brain centers and can increase focus and concentration in part by increasing levels of the neurochemicaldopamine and acetylcholine, which we talked about a little bit earlier in this arrow model of focus. So we'll provide a link to that app, I don't have any relationshipto that app I should mention, but it's an excellent one, it's one that I've used for many years. There are also additionalfunctions within the app, such as for sleep and for other things, but the 40 HZ, 4-0-h-zis the way it reads out, 40 HZ stimulation has been shown to improvefocus and concentration. Here is my recommendationand the way that I use it. I would not use 40 HZ binaural beats every time I'm doing a about of work. What I tend to do is use it for about fiveminutes prior to that work and then turn it off and then do the work and I'll talk about othertools to use during that work, whether or not it's reading or math or even just emailing orsomething where I require a bunch of focus for a while. However, there are timesin which I'm in an area or I'm in a state of mind where I'm feeling very distractable and then I'll keep the40 HZ binaural beats on the entire time I'm doing that about of cognitive work. I'll also sometimes usethe 40 HZ binaural beats prior to a workout, in particular weight workouts, where I really want to be able to focus on and contract specific muscles. So it's a very useful tool, again, supported by qualitypeer reviewed science, zero cost, available out there notjust in the BrainWave app but in multiple apps. I think many of you will benefit from it. Some of you might notexperience it immediately as a total dropping into a tunnel of focus in the same way that you might with say the sorts of neurochemicals that we'll talk about later, like Alpha-GPC and someof these other things that change neurochemicals directly, but nonetheless 40 HZ binaural beats are a very powerful tool, again, zero cost non-pharmacologic tool that tap into your own endogenous, meaning within you orexists within you physiology in order to increase acetylcholine and some other neurochemicals and they have been shownto work quite well.

# Tool: White, Brown & Pink Noise, Transition to Focused State
Okay so assuming thatyou are sleeping well 80% of the nights of your life or at least working on thevarious protocols and tools to sleep well and sufficiently long 80% of the nights of your life, and you are interested in additional tools that are sound based in order to improve your abilityto concentrate and focus, there are quality peer reviewedstudies supporting the idea that white noise or pink noise, and believe it or not, there is something called pink noise, it has to do with thespecific frequencies of sound that are in the noise, well white noise and pink noise have been shown to notimprove concentration per se, but to improve people's ability to transition into concentrated states. So I don't tend to usewhite noise and pink noise while I work, but I know anumber of people that do. I know people that also usewhat's called brown noise. The folks I know from the engineering andcomputer science side get really into these details of white noise, pink noise, brown noise. You can find white noise,pink noise or brown noise and listen to it throughheadphones or in the room. There is indeed some data to support the fact that white noise, and to some extent, pinknoise and brown noise can support the release ofparticular neurochemicals, but more data showing thatthey can amplify the activity of neurons in the so-calledprefrontal cortex, this front area, sort of thebumper behind your forehead, that is directly related to your ability to direct your own focus and remain focused on certain things. So you have the option of either using binaural beats before, but not during your work,that is 40 HZ binaural beats, or 40 HZ binaural beatsthroughout your attempt to focus. You also have the option ofnot using binaural beats, but using white noise,pink noise or brown noise. Again, there are a lot of zero cost apps, you can find also white noise,pink noise and brown noise on YouTube. Again, these are tools that really have been shownover and over in humans to allow people to focus with more depth and to decrease thetransition time into focus.

# Warm-Up for Cognitive Work, Refocusing Attention & Neuroplasticity 
This is a really key point. A lot of people are challenged with getting into a mode of focus. None of us, however, should be expected to just sit down and dropdirectly into a state of focus. I think that's completely anunfair request of ourselves. I mean, for instance, you wouldn't expect yourselfto go out on the track or go out for a run and not warm up. You might jog for a few minutes or even walk before you would jog and then jog before you would run, right, I would hope you would do that. And if you're doing resistance training, I doubt that you go over andload up the bar or the machine with the maximum amount ofweight that you can move and then just drop right into that, you always do a warmup. And I think it's veryimportant to understand mental work, focus and concentration as requiring that warmup. What is that warmup? Well, you know what that warmup is. That warmup is the ramping up or the increase ofepinephrine, adrenaline, acetylcholine, and dopamine. Right, the way that neurochemicals work is we don't just get toflip switches in our brain because we decide to, that's a fantasy. That's sort of the "Limitless" movie or movies and ideas that suddenly you're goingto flip a switch on your arm and all of a sudden you'regoing to be in a laser focus, that is just not the way thatyour nervous system works. There's a gradual dropping into any state, whether or not that state is sleep, right, you go from shallowsleep to deep sleep and then out eventually. Focus too, you go from shallow focus to increasingly deep focus. That is, in our metaphor ofthe arrow, it's very broad, it's pointed at a lot of things. And over time as we drop into focus, that arrow is narrowing andnarrowing and narrowing. In fact, probably betterto think about it narrowing and then sometimes oscillatingand getting wider again. We might hear something down the hallway or more typically our phonewill buzz or we'll think, oh, I wonder what so and so is doing or I had to contact them about something. Your focus is dynamic, it is not what we call a step function. It's not like you gofrom unfocused to focused and then you drop into your maximal focus. By understanding that it's dynamic, by understanding that youare going to be continually going in and out of progressively butvarying levels of focus, you will greatly releasethe pressure on yourself to feel focused all thetime when you want to be. This is very key. People who are very goodat focusing understand this and understand that theycan't expect themselves to just immediately focus and then snap into or out of focus. Okay so be patient with yourself and also understand thatfocus is an ability, that you can improve your ability to focus by engaging the neuralcircuits responsible for focus repeatedly over time throughso-called neuroplasticity, the ability of your nervous system to change in response to experience. And that has a coupleof different components, but put very simply, what we repeat gets etchedinto our nervous system and becomes easier over time. And the more emotionally important or vital something feels to us, the more likely it is totrigger neuroplasticity. We're going to talk a little bit more about how to increase neuralcircuits for focus later, but right now, what you have in hand is the key importance of sleep and I again will directyou to hubermanlab.com and the Neural Network Newsletter to really work on optimizing your sleep. We've also got twoauditory sound based tools for improving focus, there's 40 HZ binauralbeats used before or during bouts of focus and concentration. And if you don't likethose, or even if you do, you might alternate them with or occasionally use white noise,pink noise or brown noise, also readily available at zero cost.

# Tool: Ultradian Cycles: Warm-Up, Maintaining Focus & Deliberate Defocusing 
A question I often get is howlong should I try to focus? Well, the research literaturepoint to the key importance of so-called ultradian cycles. You've all probablyheard of circadian cycles or circadian biology,circa, the day, circadian, is about 24 hour cycle. Well, our brain and bodyoperate within that day or within each and every day I should say with 90 minute ultradian cycles. So my suggestion would be anytime you're going tosit down and try and focus or you're going to tryand do a focused about of physical exercise or skilllearning or musical learning, or maybe you're even justhaving a conversation, maybe you're a therapist or you're attending therapy or a class, how long should it be? And the ideal durationis about 90 minutes, not exactly 90 minutes, but we can reliablysay 90 minutes or less, okay, it doesn't have tobe the full 90 minutes. But trying to push yourselfto be able to drop into two hours of focus orthree hours of focus, while possible is not really in line with what we know aboutthe underlying biology. Everything from our sleep states or the different stages ofsleep and our waking states is divided into these 90 minute cycles or so-called ultradian cycles. So what I like to do isset a timer for 90 minutes. I acknowledge and accept the fact that under most conditions unless I'm really pressed for a deadline and I'm optimally caffeinated, et cetera, the first five to 10minutes of that 90 minutes are a transition time, it'slike the warm up for focus, but I do include it in that 90 minutes. And then I really try and drop into doing focused mental workor learning of some sort, again, this could be physicalas well, motor skill learning or anything, we're running orlifting weights, et cetera, and really try and drop into that across the full 90 minutes, again accepting the fact, okay it's not just an idea, the fact that occasionallyour focus will flicker, it will jump out of focus, and then a big part of being able to focus is to go back to focusing. The way I'd like you toconceptualize this perhaps is that arrowhead suddenlygetting very, very broad, that you're focusing on many things or that arrow shifts to adifferent location in the room. The key is to be able to shift it back and to narrow it once againand that's an active process, so much so that it requiresa lot of metabolic energy, your brain is the chiefconsumer of metabolic energy. The calories that you consume, the so-called basal metabolic rate, most of that isn't related to movement or heartbeat or breathing, it's related to brain function. Your brain is a glutton withrespect to caloric need. So understand that atthe end of 90 minutes or maybe even after 45 minutes, you might feel rathertired or even exhausted. And it's very importantthat after a about of focus that you take at least 10 minutes and ideally as long as 30 minutes and go through what Icall deliberate defocus. You really want to focuson somewhat menial tasks or things that really don't require a ton of your concentration. This is starting to become a little bit of a movement out there in the kind of pop psychologyand optimization world, this idea of not looking at your phone as you walk down the hall to the bathroom, certainly not looking atyour phone in the bathroom. And I should mention, by the way, this is a particular annoyance of mine, have you noticed that wait times for restrooms in public places has increased substantiallyin the last 10 years? The reason for that isnot digestive, okay, it's not the gut microbiome, I mean it might be the gut microbiome, but chances are it's because people are ontheir phones in the bathroom. So you're doing yourselfand everybody else a favor by staying off your phone in the restroom, staying off your phonewhile walking down the hall. Try and give yourself some timeto deliberately decompress, to let your mental states idle, to not be focused on any one thing. That period of idling is essential for your ability to focus, much in the same way that rest between setsof resistance training or rest between exercise is vital to being ableto focus and perform during the actual sets orduring the actual bouts of running or cycling or whatever your particularform of exercise might be. So deliberate decompression is key. And I know this is hard becausewe're all being drawn in by the incredible rich array of sensory information available on our phones and other devices, but I can't emphasize this enough, our ability to focus is not just related to what happens duringthe entry and movement through those focused boutsbut after those focused bouts. We really need to deliberately decompress. And of course, the ultimate decompress, the time in which we are not directing our thinking interaction is during sleep. And so it's no wonder, or I should say it holdstogether logically, that that deep, long lasting duration of not controlling where our mind is at is in fact the ultimateform of restoration, even if we have very intense dreams. So take that period after each90 minute or less focus about, right, remember those focus bouts don't have to be full 90 minutes, let's say you do 45 minutes of work, you're just done with it, set it down and go dosomething for maybe five, 10, maybe even 30 minutes thatis functional for your day, right, not just walking around in circles or staring up at the sky although if you can do that, do that, but most of us have other things to do, but do things that are rather automatic or reflexive for you, and try not to do any focused reading, try not to bring your visioninto a tight location, such as your phone and tryand deliberately decompress, because that will allow you to drop into intense spouts of focus again repeatedly andrepeatedly throughout the day.

# How Many Daily Ultradian Cycles Can One Perform? 
I'm often asked how many ultradian cycles one can perform throughout the day? That depends on how well you've slept, how well you are nourished, which we'll talk about in a moment, and how well trained upyour focus capacity is. And here's the paradox, if you are very trained at focusing, if you're very good atdropping into focus, you're actually going to need more deliberate decompression and defocus and I recommend only doing about two, maybe three deep work sessions per day. So not one 90 minute sessionthan expecting yourself to do to another one andanother one, another one, but rather one deepwork 90 minute session, and maybe another in the afternoon. A lot of people getsurprised by this and say, "Wait, how many people can afford to just work three hours a day?" I'm not saying justwork three hours a day. I'm really talking aboutthe hard mental work. And again, somewhat paradoxically, the more you can concentrate, the more deeply you can concentrate, the fewer deep work concentration bouts you can actually perform each day. This makes sense, however, if you think about it in the context of say resistance training. If you are stronger andstronger in the gym, or you're an endurance athlete and you can run ultra-marathons,100 miles or so, you are essentially cutting a deeper cut into your recovery capacity than somebody who's notvery skilled at those things or can't perform as much intense work. So the intensity of thework scales directly with how long you needto rest after that work. I at this stage of my life am pretty good at dropping into and maintaining focusedbouts of concentration provided the landscapeof my life is right, you know, I don't have someburning stressful thing that's essential or anemergency that I'm tending to and that I put my phoneaway or turn it off, I can do three 90 minutefocus bouts per day, but that's about it. And then in between those focus bouts, I'm doing other thingsthat require less focus. Some of you may be able to perform four. What I highly recommend is that you try doing at least one, that is one 90 minute or less about of focusedconcentrated work per day, and yes, that means the weekends too. And on the weekends, I like to read a book with my phone nowhere insight, not on a device, that's what I do or I'll listento an audiobook sometimes while taking a walk, but really concentrating onwhat I'm trying to learn, what I'm hearing and what I'm seeing. So again, a daily 90 minuteabout is one to start with and I would say afterabout four weeks of that, if you're able to stay concentrated and work through the agitation, then I would consider increasingthe number of focus bouts. Again, this is not to say that you should go to your teacher or your PhD advisor or yourparent or your friends and say, "Listen, I can't reallyconcentrate or think about anything for more than 90 minutes per day." That's not what I'm saying. These are deep focus bouts. These are bouts of work, or I should say mentalwork or physical work where you're really forcingyourself to focus and refocus, to sharpen the head of that arrowhead, to redirect it to what you'retrying to concentrate on, and it is indeed hard work. I would even think about it more or less like a workout of any kind.

# AG1 (Athletic Greens)
Before we continue withtoday's discussion, we're going to take a brief pause to acknowledge oursponsor Athletic Greens, also called AG1. I started taking AthleticGreens way back in 2012 so I'm delighted thatthey've been a sponsor of this podcast. Athletic Greens containsvitamins, minerals, probiotics, digestive enzymes, and adaptogens, so it's got a lot of things in there and that's actually thereason I started taking it and the reason I still takeit once or twice a day. It essentially covers allof my nutritional bases and the probiotics inparticular are important to me because of the critical importance of what's called the gut brain axis, that is neurons and othercell types in the gut, in the digestive tract thatcommunicate with the brain and the brain back to the digestive tract in order to control thingslike mood, immune function, hormone function, and on and on. Whenever somebody has asked me, what's the one supplementthey should take, I always answer Athletic Greens. I gave that answer longbefore I ever had this podcast and it's the answer I still give now for all the reasons that Idetailed just a moment ago. If you'd like to try Athletic Greens, you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim a special offer. They'll give you five free travel packs that make it really easyto mix up Athletic Greens while you're on the road, plus a year supply of vitamin D3+K2, which are also very important for a huge number of bodilyfactors and brain factors that impact your immediateand long-term health. Again, that's athleticgreens.com/huberman to claim that special offer.

# Virtusan: Mental & Physical Health Journeys 
I'd like to call your attention to a new and extremely useful tool for learning and applyingscience based protocols for mental health, physicalhealth and performance. It's called Virtusan,v-i-r-t-u-s-a-n, and it's an app. And inside the app, you'llfind what are called journeys. Each journey is aimed at a specific goal, such as improving yoursleep or tracking your sleep or improving your abilityto focus and concentrate or improving your nutritionor specific exercise programs. The Virtusan app makesa lot of the protocols that you've seen here on the Huberman Lab Podcast and elsewhere very easy to understandand access and practice. And in fact, it tracks your progress with each of these protocols. I and several other researchers have been directly involved in developing the specificjourneys and protocols that you'll find within the Virtusan app. In fact, a lot of it involvesdirect video tutorials from me and others that you'll recognize from social media and from podcasts. Everything that you'll findwithin the Virtusan app is geared towards givingyou the latest science in simple, straightforward protocols to allow you to improve yourmental health, physical health and performance. If you want check it out, you can go to the AppStore under Virtusan, again, that's spelled v-i-r-t-u-s-a-n, or you can go to virtusan.com/huberman. Again, that's virtusan.com/huberman.

# Tool: Fasted vs. Fed States & Focus, Prevent an Afternoon Crash, Ketosis
I mentioned the topic ofnutrition a little bit ago, and of course, nutritionis a complicated topic. In fact, one of the quickest ways to get yourself into a battle online is to say somethingdefinitive about nutrition. I just want to clearly statemy stance about nutrition. I fully support and applaud those of you that arevegans for whatever reason, those of you that are purecarnivore for whatever reason, and those of you that areomnivores for whatever reason. I happen to be an omnivore. My goal is always to eat high quality, minimally or non-processed foods and to eat things in moderation. So I do eat some meat from sustainable sourcesor from organic sources, I eat some starches and I eatvegetables and I eat fruits, I try not to eat sugars and I don't really likehighly processed foods at this point in my life. That's me, that's what I do, but I'm certainly not dictatingwhat people should eat. I know certain people are ketogenic, and I can say that forpeople who achieve ketosis and can get into ketosis, yes indeed, there is a mentalstate associated with ketosis that will allow your brain to function and to think really clearly that many people find very attractive and keep them goingback over and over again to a ketogenic diet. I'm somebody who for instancehas not been in ketosis many times in my life, at least not deliberately so, but I actually will ingestliquid ketones from time to time because of the furthercognitive enhancement and physical enhancement that I experience on top of nutrition that doesinclude some carbohydrates. So there are a lot of differentways to approach all this, whether or not you're a vegan, omnivore, vegetarian, carnivore, etcetera, the point is this, your ability to focus, and in fact, your ability of neurons to encode specific informationin your environment, that is to represent what'sout there in the world, is actually related toyour blood glucose level. Now here I'm setting aside the discussion of ketosis and ketogenicdiets for the moment, but there's a beautiful study that was published in Neuron not long ago that showed that the tuning, that is the precision withwhich neurons in the brain will represent things in our environment is actually much greater when there is sufficientglucose in the brain. Translated into English, thismeans that when we are fasted or when our blood glucose is very low, we aren't able to perceiveand think about things as clearly. Now there's a twist to this, however. Many people who practiceintermittent fasting, and I should say I practice a sort of pseudointermittent fasting, I generally eat my meals between the hours of 11:00 AM and 8:00 PM although sometimes there'ssome wiggle around that, occasionally have an early breakfast, I'm not super rigid about it, but I know there are a number of people who are doing longer fasts or they're eating in a six hour window. We did an entire episode about fasting, you can again find thatat hubermanlab.com, we'll likely have Satchin Panda, who's an expert in intermittentfasting, on the podcast. Intermittent fasting has a lot of different potential benefits. For some people, it's a convenient way torestrict their calories. For other people, it's aconvenient way to avoid eating, that is it's easier to not eatthan to eat a small portion so they opt for intermittentfasting and so on and so forth. But one of the thingsthat you hear very often is that some people like being fasted because they like the clarityof mind that it provides. Here's the situation. Neurons, unless you'rein a ketogenic diet, really thrive on glucose,they love glucose. And as I mentioned before, your ability to think and perceive things is actually enhanced by having sufficientglucose in your bloodstream. So why would it be thatsome people experience a heightened state of mentalclarity when they are fasted? I've certainly experienced that before. Well, I should say that provided you're well hydrated enough and you have enoughelectrolytes in your system, what tends to happen isthat when you ingest food, there's a shift in your nervous system towards so-called parasympathetic mode, that is the more relaxed, you've probably heardit as rest and digest, although it does other things, the more relaxed mode that canindeed make us very sleepy. If we have too many carbohydrates, it actually can make us quite sleepy. However, if we have any food, if we have enough of it, that is if our gut is full, it diverts blood to our gut and we become sleepy andwe can't focus as well. So a lot of people really like fasting and the state of being fastedfor focus and concentration because they don't have as much of that parasympathetic activation, they're just not as sleepy. And in fact, under those conditions, half as much caffeine willgive you just as much lift as twice as much caffeine will give you on a full belly of pasta and that's just the waythat caffeine interacts with blood glucose. So what I'd like you to imagine is if you had a measureof focus from zero to 10, these are arbitrary units, 10 being maximally focused and zero being not focused at all, imagine a U-shaped function, right, where if you're very fasted, you're going to have high degreeof focus and concentration, but then if you ingest somefood and your belly is full, your focus and concentration is reduced. But having enough blood glucose and maybe even elevated blood glucose will increase cognitive function. So there are two ends of the spectrum. On one end of the spectrum, blood glucose is relativelylow and you're fasted and you can think and behavein a very concentrated way and on the other end of the spectrum, you have a lot of bloodglucose, or I should say, sufficient blood glucose, you never want your bloodglucose to be too high, and that allows your neuronsto encode and perceive and basically allow youto think really clearly. So you sort of have topick your condition. What do you want for your boutsof focus and concentration? I actually do both. So what I do is, as I mentioned before, I eat my meal sometime around 11:00 AM, my first meal typically unless I'm very hungry when I wake up. And so I will do my workoutand one about of focused work. I always think of this as myhard work early in the day and I do that fasted, I'll be consuming water with electrolytes, maybe LMNT or other electrolytes, maybe some caffeine as wellin the form of yerba mate or coffee, that's my first focusabout of 90 minutes or less, that is essentially donefasted and then I'll eat and then I do notice after I eat, I actually have a diminishedcapacity to focus. But then again in the afternoon, I will do another 90minute about of focus, and I'll talk aboutsome of the tools I use to make sure that thatabout of focus is optimal for getting the most amountof focused work done, whether or not it's mentalwork or physical work, although I tend to do myphysical work early in the day and my mental work bothearly and late in the day. So to make this very simpleor as simple as I can for you being fasted is great forfocus and concentration provided you're not thinkingabout food the entire time and being fed is terrificfor focus and concentration, it actually can improve neuronal function provided that you didn'teat too much food. So one way to manage this is if you're going to have a lunch, to make sure that you don'tstuff yourself at lunch, that you're not overeatingand to not get quite so full that you put your nervous system into this parasympathetic mode and make it hard tofocus in the afternoon. I know a lot of people experience a dip or even a crash in energy in the afternoon that make it really hard to focus. For that reason, I'll just remind people of a tool I've talkedabout many times before, which is based on the biology of adenosine and caffeine, et cetera, which is to delay yourfirst caffeine intake to 90 to 120 minutes after waking up. I know that can be painfulfor certain people. I violate that rule, when I'm working out veryearly in the morning. I'll drink my caffeine before my workout which often occurs within30 to 60 minutes of waking. But in general, unless I'mworking out very early, I will ingest my caffeine 90to 120 minutes after I wake up. So again, I want to emphasize that if you hear somebody out there say being fasted is optimal forfocus and concentration. Well, that is true in one context and perhaps ideal for acertain part of the day. And other people will say,no, neurons run on glucose, you need glucose in your bloodstream in order to get those neurons to be tuned, that is to respond withelectrical activity in the optimal way whenyou're reading something or when you're trying to perform exercise. Well, that's also true. And of course, you can incorporate both. I, in fact as I just described, incorporate both fastedstates and fed states in order to optimize myconcentration and focus. And as a brief note about ketosis, for those of you that actually managed to transition into ketosis and are maintaining a ketogenic state, that, as I mentioned earlier, can enhance brain function,concentration and focus because of the way inwhich ketones can be used as a so-called optimal fuel for neurons. The ketogenic diet wasoriginally designed, if you will, for epilepsy, it has a whole relationship to epilepsy and controlling epileptic seizures, and it can in fact allow people to achieve focus,concentrated brain states. So in the future, I'll doan episode about ketosis and be sure to circle backon how to optimize ketosis for focus and concentration. Although I have to believe that most of the people listening to this are probably not in ketosisor following a ketogenic diet so that's why I mainly focused on fasted states and fed states. And just to make sure that I'm thorough, a fasted state to me would be a state in which youhaven't ingested any calories, but may have ingested caffeine or maybe even a small amountof artificial sweetener or something like that, but really haven't ingested any significant number of calories in the previous four toeight or maybe even 12 hours. And again, there'stremendous variation here, depending on how long people have fasted, whether or not we'retalking about the state right after people wake up, et cetera. Again, if you're interestedin intermittent fasting, both for the sake of mental and physical health and performance, check out our episode onfasting at hubermanlab.com. I also want to touch back on this idea

# Tool: Foods to Improve Focus & Regulating Food Volume
of which foods can increase focus. You know, in the episodeon ADHD that I did, I touched on this quite a bit as it relates to elimination diets. There's a whole industry and a ton of interest for obvious reasons into what sorts of things kids and adults should and shouldn't eat in order to reduce symptoms of ADHD. I think that the sum total ofthose data point to the fact that reducing simple sugar intake and certainly highly processed foods, so ice cream, candy, chips, et cetera, those sorts of things, really does seem toimprove symptoms of ADHD in both children and adults. But once you move pastthat and you start to say, well, which foods can improveconcentration and focus? Well, foods that for instanceinclude a lot of tyrosine, which is a precursor to dopamine, and now you know why dopamineis important in this context, are certainly going to increaseconcentration and focus. So things like Parmesan cheese, certain meats, certain nuts, you can look up which foods contain high amounts of tyrosine. There are also some fruits and vegetables that include high amounts of tyrosine, but to be quite direct, it doesn't matter whether ornot you're ingesting foods that are rich in the precursor amino acids to dopamine, acetylcholine, et cetera, if you are consuming largeamounts of those foods. That is one can look and see for instance, that a steak includesa lot of the precursors to acetylcholine. It has amino acid precursorsto dopamine as well and there are other foodsthat will do that as well, but if I were to ingestsay two ribeye steaks, that's a lot of meat and it will direct alot of blood to my gut and it will cause me to be sleepy and that will create challenges of me being able to achieve statesof focus and concentration. So the simple way to putthis is if you eat too much or you eat a very large volume of food, you are going to diminishyour focus and concentration. The key is to eat enough that you're nourished forthe certain activities, mental and physical thatyou need to perform, but if you're eating large meals, you are going to diminishyour concentration and focus

# Tool: Caffeine & Focused Work, Dopamine Efficacy, Alertness
period. I know many people are curiousas to whether or not caffeine can improve focus andconcentration, and indeed it can. There is an immense amountof data supporting the idea that caffeine, provided its consumed inthe appropriate dosages, can improve mental performanceand physical performance, and it largely does that through improvements infocus and concentration. The dosage of caffeine of course, is going to depend on howcaffeine adapted you are, how much caffeine tolerance you have. And that is going to vary tremendously depending on whether or notyou ingest that caffeine with or without food,as I mentioned earlier. But there is a kind of general range in which we can talk about caffeine as being useful forfocus and concentration. And the range is basically from 100 milligrams to 400 milligrams. I want to caution everybody out there, if you're somebody whosuffers from anxiety or panic attacks, and you're not used to ingesting caffeine and you run out and ingest400 milligrams of caffeine in the form of espresso or yerba mate or an energy drink or in pill form, that is going to be veryuncomfortable for you, you're going to be sweating profusely, your heart rate is going to increase, you're going to be quite panicked in fact or at least anxious. So be cautious with youruse and adopting of caffeine if you're not already caffeine adapted, but most people do quite well to ingest 100 to 200milligrams of caffeine prior to doing some focused work. And again, I recommenddelaying your caffeine intake to 90 to 120 minutes after waking, unless you're using that caffeine to really jolt yoursystem before a workout. Caffeine can of course beingested in various forms, even pill form, but most people ingestit in the form of coffee or my particular favoriteway to ingest caffeine is yerba mate. It is important and I should note that you should actively avoid the smoked versions of yerba mate as they contain a lot of carcinogenic, cancer promoting compounds. There's some great yerbamate brands out there. The most cost effective way to consume it would be to use the loose leaf tea and to pour water over that. There's one particular brand that I like, I don't have any affiliationto them whatsoever, but I've been using itfor years, it's Anna Park. It's an organic brand that issold, I buy mine on Amazon, you can find it elsewhereon the internet as well. Again, I don't have anyaffiliation to them, it's just very cost effective, very clean, it doesn't have the smoked flavor, at least the one that I buyis not the smoked variety so none of the carcinogeniccompounds are in there at least that I'm aware ofand I like the way it tastes and it provides a veryeven lift and stimulant that I think certainly works for me and that a number of people I know that I have suggested to also enjoy. Yerba mate or caffeine alsohave other additional benefits, in particular, the caffeinein yerba mate and coffee and other sources of caffeine are known to increasethe density and efficacy, that is the number and thefunction of dopamine receptors, and this has been shownin humans several times. So by ingesting caffeine pretty regularly, you're actually increasingthe ability of dopamine to have this effect ofincreasing motivation and drive. I tend to ingest caffeineonly early in the day, I tend to cut off my caffeine intake somewhere around one or 2:00 PM to ensure that I can getinto a good night's sleep, but I realize that thereare people out there that ingest caffeine as late as two or three in the afternoon and can still sleep fine. I will caution those of you that think that you can drink caffeine in the evening or nighttimeand still fall asleep. All of the research points to the fact that the architecture of your sleep and the depth of your sleep is disrupted. Even if you're able tofall and stay asleep, the sleep you're gettingis simply not as good as the sleep you would get if you were to shut offyour caffeine intake at least eight hours before bedtime, and ideally more like 10 oreven 12 hours before bedtime. But of course, there arepractical constraints as well. Okay so caffeine isincreasing dopamine's function by changing the number andefficacy of dopamine receptors, but of course, it alsoincreases our wakefulness, our alertness, and that is largely throughthe neurochemical systems related to adenosine, which is a molecule thatbuilds up in our brain and body the longer we are awake, it's part of the sleepinesssystem if you will, it makes us feel fatigued or tired, and caffeine also operateson the epinephrine, the adrenaline system. In fact, if we ingest too much caffeine, we'll sometimes get the jitters. Those jitters are really thesympathetic, as it's called, nervous system's bias toward movement, and our pupils will dilate,they actually get broader. Now somewhat paradoxically,when our pupils get bigger, the pupils of our eyes that is, our visual world actually narrows, it becomes more tunnel-like. A lot of people don't realize this. When our pupils are reallysmall, that means we are relaxed. So if you ever see someone with really tiny or pin size pupils, they're very relaxed. If their pupils are verybig, they're very dilated, well then they are very amped up, they are very, very alert. Caffeine increases alertnessby increasing epinephrine, adrenaline release both inthe brain and within the body. And so that's anotherway that it facilitates focus and concentration.

# Tool: Stress & Improved Concentration 
Now there are other waysto increase epinephrine in the brain and body besidescaffeine or other stimulants, and in fact, that has been studied. There's an excellent study that was carried out not thatlong ago on how stress itself can increase our abilityto focus and concentrate, that's right how stress itself can increase focus and concentration. You know, most people think of stress as impairing our ability to focus, but that's actually not true. When we are stressed, itinvolves the deployment, the release of adrenaline, epinephrine, and that that adrenaline bothchanges our visual field, in other words, it narrows our vision to a more tunnel-like focus, that is it makes the arrow in our metaphor of the arrow more sharp, and it improves our concentration. And this makes sense givenwhat we know about stress. When we're stressed, we tend to be stressedabout a specific thing, we start anticipatingor wondering or thinking about what's going to happen next? What led up to this? How is this going to impact me? How do I feel right now? It really narrows the context of our thinking and our behavior. So one of my favorite studiesthat really illustrates how stress can improveconcentration and performance is one that was publishednot that long ago and I will provide a linkto this in the show notes. It's a paper published in the "Journal of ExperimentalPsychology" in 2020. The title of the paperis, not surprisingly, "Acute stress improvesconcentration performance", first author DeGroote, d-e-g-r-o-o-t-e. And this study involvedtaking a number of subjects and stressing them out or not prior to a cognitiveor concentration task. And there are a lot of data in this paper, but I'm just going to hone inon one specific set of data. And I should mention as I go there, that they measured things likecortisol, a stress hormone, they measured anxiety, itwas a quite thorough study. And what they found was thatconcentration performance improved manyfold, I should say, from, there was a greater than doubling of concentration andperformance in the stress group. And stress in this context was provided using a standard way of inducing stress. What they basically do is they bring subjects into the laboratory and they have to either dosomething fairly mundane in the control group or they have to do asimulated job interview, an arithmetic task, and they're being evaluatedas they're doing this. So this isn't intense psychosocial stress. They're not watching anything disturbing, they're not being traumatizedin any kind of way. This is fairly low levels of stress that raised their levels of epinephrine, and we know this from this study, and their levels of cortisol,another stress hormone, modestly within their brain and blood. But that even modest increasein these stress hormones and their reportedpsychological levels of stress really enhanced theirfocus and concentration. This may come as surprising'cause like many people think, gosh, stress really diminishescognitive performance, but that's absolutely wrong, stress improves cognitive performance.

# Tool: Deliberate Cold Exposure & Focus, Dopamine & Epinephrine 
Now of course there are otherways to increase stress levels and to do that in healthy ways to improve concentration and performance and one of the best ways to do that because it's so sure fireand it's generally safe provided you do it safelyis deliberate cold exposure. This is something I've talkedabout on the podcast before, but deliberate coldexposure can be achieved by getting into a cold showerfor one to five minutes. If you're not used to it, you probably want tostart with one minute, or you can get into an ice bath, and nowadays there area number of different commercial sources ofcirculating cold water or if you have accessto a body of cold water like a lake or a pool or an ocean. We know that getting intocold water or under cold water greatly increases epinephrinelevels and dopamine levels in the brain and blood. There's a beautifulstudy that was published in the European Journal of Physiology that showed that the increasesin dopamine are massive, near doubling or more of dopamine levels that arevery long lasting for hours, and epinephrine, andindeed cortisol levels are also increased, and in ways that support not just immune systemfunction because they do that, and mood because it does that, but they can really improveconcentration and focus. I touched on this a littlebit in an episode about memory that there's an age old practice really dating back to medieval times of putting people into cold water right after they learnsomething in order to spike, to increase their epinephrine as a way to consolidate those memories. For the sake of today's discussion, if you are interested in ways to improvefocus and concentration, you need to increase your epinephrine, your adrenaline levels. Cold water exposure is one of the mostefficient ways to do that. This is not a biohack. I don't like the word hack, I know it's commonly used, but a hack is somethingwhere you're using one thing for a different purpose thanit was originally intended for and here, I'm not referring to the shower or the cold bath, I'm referring to epinephrine. Epinephrine is a neurochemical that will place your visioninto more of a tunnel mode, which will allow you to focus on cognitive work or physicalwork in a more specific way, you're not going to be as distractable, and it's very easy to achieve by getting into a cold showeror a cold body of water for a brief period of time. People always ask how long toget under or into cold water and how cold to make it. Here's the thing, it shouldbe uncomfortably cold, but safe to stay in forone to five minutes. Okay so uncomfortably cold,you really want to get out, but safe to stay in, not so cold that it's goingto give you a heart attack and not so warm that it's comfortable that it doesn't createthat adrenaline release. Cold water exposure, I should say deliberate, cold water or non deliberate cold water exposure reliably increases epinephrine levels. It is incredibly usefulas a tool for this, and it is in fact, zero costor even negative zero cost. How could it be negative zero cost? Well, you can certainlysave on your heating bill by taking a cold shower so that's one way. And for those of you thathave access to devices or locations where youcan get into cold water, you can submerge, well then that can work. For those of you that don't,maybe you take a cold bath, you get in up to your neck,that's going to be most efficient. For those of you that can't do that, you'll get under a cold shower. Again, it should be comfortably cold to the point where you want to get out, but that you can safely stayin for one to five minutes. How long should you doit before a workout? Well, if you get into really cold water, it's uncomfortably cold and get out after about three minutes, you're probably good to go,dry off and get to work. Some of you might thinkthis is a little bit silly as a tool for focus and concentration, but if you look at the data on epinephrine and how powerfully it can increase focus, I think you'd be very impressed. I mean it certainly canincrease one's ability to attend to specific visual stimuli, so for reading or math work, et cetera, it's going to be very useful. And of course you don'twant to make it so cold that you're shivering andchattering the whole time. And of course you could, if you like, combine this with 40 HZ binaural beats, there's no reason why you couldn't combinethe two protocols. But the point here is that alot of people would love to and I think ought to leverage the health promoting and powerful effects of increasing epinephrineon focusing concentration and running out and gettingstressed by a life event or getting into an argumentor something like that simply as a way to increasefocus and concentration doesn't seem that adaptive to me. So deliberate cold exposure is a straightforward way to do that, it doesn't involve anyone else, I suppose you could doit with somebody else, but it doesn't require anyone else. And again, there are zero low and even negative costways to approach that. If you'd like to know how long the positive effects of epinephrine last toward improving focus and concentration, well, if we look to thatstudy from DeGroote et al, the acute stress improvescognitive performance study, they measured concentration before and 30 minutes afterthe stress was induced and there does appear tobe a quite long lasting, really up to an hour or more effect of increasing epinephrine.

# Layer Focusing Tools & Design Your Own Protocols 
So how might you applythese sorts of protocols early in the day or later in the day? Well, one suggestion or onepotential protocol would be if you're going to sitdown and do some work, if you're already feelingalert and focused, no need to reach to this tool, but if you're feeling likeyour focus and alertness isn't quite where you'd like it to be, you could take a threeminute very cold shower or submerge yourself in coldwater for three minutes, you might have a cup of coffee as well and then sit down and do that work, maybe even throw in the40 HZ binaural beats. All of that would be layeringin the different systems, the different neurochemicals, such as acetylcholine,epinephrine and dopamine, that are going to lend themselves to a really terrific 90minute or less work about.

# Tool: Short Meditation & Improved Ability to Refocus 
Now I'd like to discuss someof the purely behavioral tools that quality peer reviewed science say can improve focus andconcentration significantly. At the beginning of today's episode, I talked about the studyfrom Dr. Wendy Suzuki's lab where they explored a 13 minute meditation done every day for aperiod of eight weeks. That meditation led tosignificant improvements in focus and concentration ability, as well as other aspectsof cognitive performance. It also improved mood and reduced stress. So you might be wondering whatexactly is this meditation? The meditation is very simple and it's one that anyone can perform. What you would want to do is set a timer for about 13 minutes, I don't think it has tobe exactly 13 minutes, but since that's what theyincluded in the study, you would set a timer for 13 minutes. You would sit or liedown, close your eyes, and you would simplyfocus on your breathing. Most people are going to benefit from only doing thatbreathing through their nose, but if you have some sort of obstruction or inability to breathejust through your nose, you could probably also do it by breathing through your noseand mouth or just your mouth. But ideally you woulddo just nasal breathing for a period of 13 minutes, concentrating on that breathing, and concentrating, meaningbringing your awareness, your so-called interoceptive awareness if you wanted to getreally technical about it, your interoceptive awareness to a point just about aninch inside of your forehead. Now, of course, that might sound kindof gory to some of you, you've never actuallybeen inside your forehead, but just about an inchbehind your forehead is where you would want toplace your concentration while also concentratingon your breathing. Now here's the thing about meditation that all studies of meditation show, which is that unless you area very experienced meditator, your concentration, your focus will drift away from your breathing and away from that locationabout an inch inside your head, inside your brain, aboutjust behind your forehead. That will happen maybe every10 seconds, every 20 seconds, maybe even every five seconds, but an important part ofsuch a meditation practice to improve concentration and focus is that you are continually refocusing back to that specific location and refocusing back on your breath. This is something that again,is not often discussed. People think that if you do a meditation and you're supposed toconcentrate on your breath, that if your mind drifts that somehow you failedin that meditation, but actually that's not the case. A huge component of improving your ability to focus and concentrateby way of neuroplasticity, rewiring of the circuitsfor focus and concentration, is the repeated return to a state of focus from a state of non-focusor diminished focus. So think about it like tryingto drive down the freeway and staying between thelane lines, excuse me. And every once in a while, because there's a bitof drift on the vehicle, maybe the wheels aren't aligned correctly or there's something elsewrong with the chassis or the steering device, it starts to drift right a little bit, then you hit the rumble strip to go rrrr, and then you pull back to the center. That's really what a focusedmeditation practice is about as opposed to expecting yourself to stay between the mentallane lines, so to speak. So if you're somebody who'sgoing to do a practice of the sort that I described, 13 minute meditation practice every day, you'd want to sit or liedown, close your eyes, start to concentrate on your breath, focus your attention on a location about aninch behind your forehead, and then fully expect that at some point, you'll be thinking about something else, and that's a cue to focusback to that location just about an inch behind your forehead and back to your breath. By doing that repeatedly over and over, what you're really training up is the network within your brain that indeed includesthat prefrontal cortex that you're focusing on aswell as some other structures, the inferior temporal cortex,indeed the hippocampus, a structure associated with memory, and other components of the neural circuit that are involved in directing our mental focus and concentration. Again, I can't emphasize the importance of this practice being oneof focusing and refocusing. In fact, I would preferto call such a practice, a refocus focused meditation,or a constantly refocusing, or maybe you all can come upwith a better name for it, I'm certainly not thatgood at naming things, but this sort of meditation practice has been shown in the study by the Suzukilab and other studies to really improve people's ability to focus and remain focused, so much so that in the beautifulbook, "Altered States," they describe a number ofdifferent meditation practices, some a little bit longer thanthe one that I described, one that's 17 minutes,another one that's 30 minutes, some people will meditateas long as 60 minutes a day, although that's quite along time, in my opinion. The point here isn't how long you focus or somehow trying to achieve total focus for the entire 13 minute or 17 minute or 60 minute about of meditation. While that would be wonderful and I think many people aspire to do that, that's a lot of hard mental work. I think for most people outthere, including myself, a relatively short meditationpractice of about 13 minutes in which you fully expect your focus and concentration to drift, but that you are continually refocusing is going to be the most effective, yes, indeed, the most effective at teaching yourself tofocus and stay concentrated. In fact, I invite you to interpret every time that youfocus off that location about one inch behind your forehead, as an opportunity to refocus and think about therefocusing as the trigger for teaching your neural circuits how to focus for extended periods of time. And as a bonus to that sortof meditation practice, the study from Wendy Suzuki's lab also showed that peopleexperience improvements in sleep and improvements in memory, so not just improvements inmood and reduction in stress and improvements infocus and concentration, but all these other positive benefits from just doing that 13 minutea day meditation practice. It's one that I've started to adopt and have felt tremendous benefit from and that I encourage manyof you to try as well. The one cautionary note is the one that I mentioned atthe beginning of the episode, which is because the refocusas I'll call it, meditation, does involve a significantamount of effort and engagement of theseprefrontal cortical circuits, it is disruptive to sleep ifperformed too closely to sleep. So if you are going to do that practice, I recommend that you not do it within the four hoursprior to your bedtime.

# Tool: Yoga Nidra, Non-Sleep Deep Rest (NSDR) & Defocus Periods
Earlier I mentioned that I would talk aboutways to improve focus if you are sleep deprived. This is something thatI'm all too familiar with. I put a lot of effortinto optimizing my sleep, that's something thatwith each passing year, I put more and more effort into, again, because sleep is so vital for mental health, physical health and performance of all kinds, but certainly in my role as a student, in my role as a professorand in my role in life, I've had numerous times in which I simply did not get enough sleep or my sleep was terriblefor whatever reason, and yet I still had workdemands and social demands, et cetera. One practice that is very effective at allowing you to focus better than you would otherwise under conditions of sleep deprivation is so called non-sleep deep rest or NSDR. This is also referred tosometimes as yoga nidra. Yoga nidra actually means yoga sleep. Yoga nidra is a practice oflying down for about 10 to 30 sometimes even as long as 60 minutes, you listen to a script,it's an audio script, that takes you through aprogressive deep relaxation, it involves a body scan, some long exhale breathing. It is very restorative in thesense that one tends to emerge from yoga nidra or NSDRfeeling greatly refreshed compared to how you felt prior to it. There is also terrific neuroimaging data from laboratories in Denmark showing that there's arestoration of dopamine levels in the so-called basal gangliaafter NSDR AKA yoga nidra. Whether or not you callit yoga nidra or NSDR, which is what I refer toit as, non-sleep deep rest, you can find these scripts atzero cost in multiple places. You can find there arecertain apps that are NSDR or yoga nidra apps. There is a NSDR protocol that was put out there byMadefor which is on YouTube that you can access for free. There is a NSDR or I shouldsay a number of NSDR protocols through the Virtusan app. There are, again, numberof different places that one can access NSDR protocols. I do NSDR for 10 to 30 minutesper day every single day, not just on days where I'm sleep deprived. If I happen to be sleep deprived, I would extend that NSDRto 30 or 60 minutes. And when you do that NSDR will depend on when youhave time for that NSDR. When I haven't slept well, what I'll try and do is find a quiet place where I can do NSDR for30 or ideally 60 minutes. Sometimes I will fall backasleep during that NSDR, that's fine if you do that, but most people will stayawake during the NSDR, and then I'll emerge fromthat and go about my day. If in the afternoon, I'm very fatiguedbecause of lack of sleep, I might do another NSDRof 10 to 30 or 60 minutes, and then another work about. Again, NSDR is something I do every day. I talked a lot about this inthe episodes related to sleep, because it can help you get better at falling and staying asleep at night in addition to feeling restorative in that immediate timeframe of the day in which you do NSDR, so it's immenselybeneficial at various times and for various purposes. But here within the context of trying to concentrate and focus when you're sleep deprived, NSDR, AKA yoga nidra is animmensely beneficial practice. There's growing amounts of quality science pointing to the neurochemicalreplenishing effects, as I mentioned before, dopamine, but also the potential for NSDR to replace sleep that you've lost. I would never want anyoneto try and use NSDR as a total replacement for sleep, but under conditions in whichyou cannot control your sleep, NSDR is going to be thebest way that I am aware of to restore your abilityto focus and concentrate for whatever purpose. And if you emerge from your NSDR and then drink some caffeine, you'll notice an even greater capacity for focus and concentration for all the reasons directlyrelated to caffeine. So again, NSDR is a general tool for enhancing your ability to sleep and it's a tool that you can use in order to compensate for,at least to some degree, compensate for lost sleep when you need to focus and concentrate. One thing that reallycontrasts NSDR and yoga nidra with the sort of focused meditation that I talked about a few minutes ago, the 13 minute meditation, is that during the 13 minute meditation, you're actively tryingto refocus and focus, whereas during NSDR and yoga nidra, you're actually trying to defocus. So you can think of the13 minute meditation for refocusing and focusing as directly tapping into and mediating improvements in the circuitryfor focus and concentration whereas you can thinkof NSDR and yoga nidra as modulating your brain and body state to allow you to focusand concentrate better. Now another tool that you can use

# Tool: Hypnosis & Focus/Deep Relaxation States
to directly tap in to the circuits forfocus and concentration and to greatly accelerateneuroplasticity, the improvements, or I should say thechanges in those circuits that will allow you tofocus and concentrate better is hypnosis. A lot of people hear hypnosisand they think stage hypnosis, you know, people squawking like chickens and doing things against their will, but actually hypnosis is a atypical but highly accessible brain state that's been studied with a lot of rigor at Stanford University School of Medicine by my colleague, Dr. David Spiegel, he's been a guest onthis podcast previously. Hypnosis is a unique brain state because it's one in whichyou are deeply focused and yet deeply relaxed. So to just sort of set upthe array of practices here so you can think about them logically, the focus refocus meditation is based on and focusedon focus, no pun intended. NSDR and yoga nidra areaimed at deep relaxation. Hypnosis is this atypical,very powerful brain state in which you combine high levels of focus and deep relaxation. Now it's a little bit of a tough one to just take oneself into, but fortunately, there's a tool based on a lot of qualitypeer-reviewed research from the Spiegel lab and other labs and that is the Reveri app, r-e-v-e-r-i. The Reveri app is available for no cost, at least for a period of time and then I think they placecertain elements of it behind a pay wall, but you can try at zero cost, it's available for Apple, soon I think also to beavailable for Android, and they have specific hypnosis protocols that you listen to, and theseare very brief protocols, follow the instructions, you're listening to aparticular audio script of David Spiegel himself, and some progressive breathing and actually some eye movements that are directly linkedto the neural circuits that allow for these highlyfocused, deeply relaxed states. And there are componentswithin the Reveri app specifically geared towards improving focus and concentration. So again, there's meditation for focus, there's deliberatedecompression, NSDR, yoga nidra, which take you into deep relaxation, and then hypnosis is this veryspecial, very directed state of highly focused and highly relaxed, or I should say deeply relaxed, that allow access to the neural circuits for focus and concentration and allow you to tune thoseup and to improve those very significantly in avery brief amount of time. And again, some of those hypnosis scripts are as short as eight minutes, some are as long as 13 minutes. So what we're really talkingabout here are zero cost tools that directly tap intothe neural circuits, the components within your brain, that allow for deep relaxation,allow for deep focus, and improve your ability tofocus and concentrate over time simply by repeating these. How often do you need torepeat the Reveri hypnosis for focus and concentrationbefore you see benefits? Well, that will varyfrom person to person. I tend to use it onceevery third or fourth day and have experiencedtremendous benefits from it. I don't think I'm unique in that sense, they have a lot of datato support this Reveri app and the protocols within it. How long do you have to do NSDR before you experience those benefits? There, I would say thefirst time and every time, because it's so deeply relaxing that you emerge from itfeeling quite restored relative to how you went into it. And as I mentioned earlierin the study on meditation, it took about eight weeks to see the effects thatthey observed in that study, but they didn't observeshorter time points. So I highly encouragepeople to explore meditation geared towards focus and refocus, also NSDR, nonsleep deeprest, AKA yoga nidra, and the Reveri app, Specifically the hypnosiswithin the Reveri app, that's geared towards improvingfocus and concentration. All of these have terrificscience to support them, this is not woo science or hacks or just something thatpeople came up with. This is all grounded in work from some of the bestuniversities in the world, from excellent groups who've looked at underlyingneural mechanisms and measured things with a lot of rigor, et cetera, et cetera. These tools are available to you, I highly recommend that you use them.

# Optimal Time of Day to Use Specific Tools
And if you're interested in the optimal time of day to do these, we already mentioned thatthe focus refocus meditation shouldn't be done too close to sleep, the Reveri hypnosis app canbe done at any time really, in fact, there's a component of falling back of sleep in there, in other words, a hypnosisspecifically geared toward helping people teachthemselves to fall back asleep when they wake up inthe middle of the night. NSDR, I always say, can be done first thing inthe morning, in the afternoon or any time of day, and in fact, I'll sometimes do that inthe middle of the night if I happen to wake up andneed to get back to sleep. So really these tools can beapplied most any time of day, except for that one caveat about the focus refocus meditation not being done too close to sleep.

# Tool: Overt Visual Focus & Deliberate Gaze 
Now there's anotherset of behavioral tools that can really help enhanceone's ability to focus and those are visual based tools. In fact, the tools I'm about to describe are actually being employedin a number of schools in China and elsewhere inorder to teach children to focus better and forlonger periods of time. The key principle here is thatmuch of our cognitive focus, our ability to think aboutsomething in a very specific way and stay focused on it, to read or to followa line of conversation or math or music, et cetera, is going to be directedby our visual system. Our visual system has twoforms of attention and focus. One is overt focus, whichis very straightforward. If I'm looking at the tip of my pen, for those of who are listening right now, I'm looking at the tip ofmy pen, that's overt focus, I'm focusing on it with my eyes, and of course, the rest ofmy brain then will follow and start to analyze thedetails of what I'm seeing and the contours of the pen, et cetera. It seems sort of obviouswhen you first hear it, but our cognitive focus tends to follow our overt visual focus. That's also why theyput blinders on horses. That's also why sometimeswearing a hoodie or a hat or limiting your visual field in some way can help you enhance your cognitive focus, it can help limit distraction. You're just not seeing as much. It's also why when we ingest caffeine or any kind of stimulantor we are stressed and our pupils dilate and our vision becomes more tunnel-like, less panoramic, but more tunnel-like, you know they say a sodastraw view of the world or you're looking through a tunnel, your focus, your visual focus is actually driving your cognitive focus. Your cognitive focus isnarrower than it would be if you were seeing thewhole scene that you're in. So when you hear this, it sounds obvious, but for many people,including many scientists, it's just not obvious thatthis would be the case. However, that is the case, your visual focus drivesyour cognitive focus. So what is a practice that has been studiedin various laboratories and that's being employedin various schools? Is to have children or adultsvisually focus on one location for a given period of time. How long? Anywhere from 30 seconds to three minutes, and believe it or not, three minutes is a long time to maintain visual focus at one location. If you were to try that right now, you'd probably find itto be a bit of a strain, but if you want to try it, you can. Keep in mind, you yes,are allowed to blink, but also keep in mind thatmeditation refocusing practice that we talked about earlier, that the refocusing is the key component of teaching yourself or your brain, you are your brain, your brain is you, but to teach yourself how to focus better. So if you're going toincorporate this practice, what you would want todo is pick a location, it could be on a wall, it could be on yourcomputer in front of you, although I would encourage it to not be the contentsof your computer screen, you might just want to blank your screen, you might want to put a piece of paper with a crosshatch there,any sort of visual target, or you can imagine a visual target and then focus your visualattention on that target and try to breathe normally,try and stay relaxed, and certainly allow yourself to blink so that your eyes don't try out. This is not a test of how longyou can go without blinking. By focusing on that particular location and by forcing yourself torefocus on that location anytime your gaze, your visiondrifts from that location, you are encouraging the circuits for focus to get better at focusingfor longer and longer and at refocusing when your focus drifts off of that location. This is incorporating neural circuits, including the prefrontal cortex, things like the frontal eye fields. For those of you curiousabout the underlying biology, this practice isrecruiting certain elements of your so-called prefrontal cortex, also the frontal eye fields, which are locations not farfrom the prefrontal cortex, that are involved indeliberately directing your gaze to particular locations in space, not outer space, although you could do this byfocusing on stars I suppose, but in visual space. Now I mentioned before that this is overt visualfocus and attention, you are overtly looking at that location,

# Covert Visual Focus; Deliberate Gaze Warm-Up & Focused Work 
but one also very powerful practice for improving focus and concentration is to use covert focus. Covert focus is where my gaze, my eyes are focused on onelocation, such as my pen, but my focus is actually directed elsewhere in the roomor location that I'm in. My mind and to some extentmy peripheral vision is focused in this case onthe door just to my left in the room that I'm in. That takes a little bit more effort. This is something thatall old world primates, of which we are old worldprimates, are able to do. And it probably evolvedas part of the mechanism by which animals couldevaluate their scene, evaluate predators,evaluate other primates while not necessarilystaring at them directly so they can obtain information, we can obtain informationwithout having to direct our gaze specifically to one location. Maybe we can obtain informationfrom multiple locations, indeed, we can. Without getting too fardown the rabbit hole of how vision and cognition relate, because we've done episodeson that previously, and simply focusing on thetools that can be incorporated to improve focus and concentration,here's what I recommend. Set yourself a low barat first and set a timer and try to focus on onelocation for 30 seconds and that's it for that day. The next day, you might add five seconds, and then the next day,five seconds after that. If you miss a day, no big deal, simply do the practice forthe same amount of time that you did the last timethat you did the practice, and then gradually try andincrease the amount of time that you can focus on onevisual location overtly by looking directly at that location. If you like, and if youfeel you have the ability, you can try and do this throughcovert attention and focus by looking straight forward for instance, and attending to somethingin the corner of the room and trying to do that for 30 seconds, you'll find that that'squite a bit harder, and then extending that by five seconds every time you do the practice. This is something that Idon't think you necessarily have to build up to beingable to do for a full hour in order to extract the benefits. In fact, the best way tothink about this practice is as a means to get into a focused state. If you remember backabout an hour or so ago, I was talking about how focused states are not a drop all the way inand then exit type phenomenon. We don't just drop into a focused state the same way we don't dropinto the peak performance of a workout, we warm up. So what I recommend is having a 30 second to three minute period at thebeginning of a about to focus where you're going todo work or physical work and anchoring your vision to one location somewhere in the room or if you want to do itcovertly, you can do that, setting a timer and trying to do that for anywhere from 30seconds to three minutes. What you're doing whenyou exercise that practice is you are ramping up neural activity within the neural circuits that create focus and concentration. Then, I would stoplooking at that location or that covert location and then I would move to thework that you're trying to do, either mental work or physical work. And if about halfwaythrough your 90 minute about or at some point in your 90minute about of work or exercise, you feel that yourconcentration is drifting rather than look at your phone and scroll through thethousands of contexts that exists within socialmedia or your phone, try just picking alocation again on the wall, focusing back on that location, using that as a ramp up to then direct your focus back towards, if your weight training, sets and reps that youmight be performing, if you're running, you might do this, orcycling you might do this by focusing on a particular location and really homing in onthat location physically. And this is a practice that alot of athletes use in fact, and if you're say doingmusical practice or math, well then, you'd wantto focus on something other than the task thatyou're trying to perform. But again, using visual focus as a way to ramp up andincrease your overall ability to focus and concentrate, and then applying that to whatever it is that you're trying to learn or perform.

# Tool: Omega-3 Essential Fatty Acids 
Next, I'd like to talk about compounds that can improve concentration and focus, and these are most oftenconsumed as supplements, although some of them, I should mention, can also be derived from food. Again, I just want to remind you that there are things,in this case compounds, that can modulate a biological mechanism, that is can modulatefocus and concentration, and there are compounds that can mediate, can directly contribute toconcentration and focus. One of the key compounds that supports concentration and focus because it generally supportsmood, concentration and focus and brain function in general are the omega-3 essential fatty acids. I've talked about theomega-3 essential fatty acids in a variety of contexts,in particular depression, but also ADHD, there areinteresting data on that, and it's really clear that getting somewhere betweenone and three grams of EPA, that is one to three grams of EPA essential fatty acidper day can improve outcomes, that is can improve mood andcan improve cognitive function. And while there's some debate about whether or not it canimprove cardiac function, it's very clear, at least to me, that ingesting one to three grams of EPA essential fattyacid per day is beneficial. But again, in the contextof focus and concentration, it's in modulating the neuralcircuits and brain function that are going to supportfocus and concentration. It's not as if taking one to three grams of EPA essential fatty acid per day is going to tap directly into only the circuits forfocus and concentration. That said, and as discussed on the episode of the Huberman Lab Podcastwith Dr. Rhonda Patrick, and on the episode on ADHD that I did, and on the episode ondepression that I did, I make it a point toingest one to three grams of EPAs per day. You can get those EPAs from other sources besidessupplements, of course, but supplements are going tobe the easiest way to do that. You could do that through liquid form, fish oil, cod liver oil, some people who are vegan optfor other sources of EPAs, you can find those out there certainly. Some people even use prescription EPAs to get the dosage really high. Dr. Ronda Patrick talked aboutthis in the episode with me, that's actually something that she does. I don't take the prescription form, I get them through pill form through our supplementaffiliate, which is Momentous, but there are a number ofdifferent quality sources of EPAs out there. And some of those qualitysources also include things like fatty fish, algae,and things of that sort. So I'll leave it to you as towhether or not you supplement with omega-3 fatty acids in order to get that oneto three grams per day or whether or not you do it through food, but I would encourage you totry and reach that threshold because there are a numberof known positive effects for mood and brain function generally. The other thing that canpositively modulate brain function

# Tool: Creatine Monohydrate 
and that actually works as afuel for neurons to function and can improve cognitive performance, and particularly withinthe brain circuits, such as the prefrontal cortex, that are involved in concentrationand focus is creatine. I know many people are familiarwith creatine monohydrate for its effects on muscle growth and strength and performance, but it's quite clear that thebulk of scientific studies have examined the role ofcreatine in the clinical context and as its role in improvingcognitive performance. So my read of the literaturehas led to a practice in which I ingest five grams per day of creatine monohydrate, the sort of standardform that's available in, this is generally available as a powder, that's certainly how I take it. I'll take the creatine powder, I'll mix it with water orwith my Athletic Greens or some sort of electrolyte drink, whatever liquid happens to beconvenient to ingest that in, the time of day doesn'treally seem to be important. Some people are strong believers in consuming creatine post-workout. While that might be beneficial, I simply take it in themorning or post-workout, it sort of depends on whenI remember to take it, but that five grams of creatine per day, in my case, really isn'tgeared towards muscle growth or strength or performance as much as it's geared toward tapping into the creatinephosphate system within the brain and specifically the benefits of creatine for prefrontal corticalnetworks, again, modulating, not directly mediating, but modulating and generally supporting the brain networks thatare going to allow me to generate focus and concentration. So much like sleep, muchlike omega-3 fatty acids, creatine monohydrate five grams a day seems to generally support brain function, which will generally supportconcentration and focus. Now in terms of compounds

# Tool: Alpha-GPC & Acetylcholine, Increased Risk of Stroke? & Garlic 
that more specifically mediateconcentration and focus, we have to go back tothat arrow metaphor model that we talked about at thebeginning of the episode, that included epinephrine,adrenaline, acetylcholine, which acts as this attentional spotlight, in fact, acetylcholine andelevated levels of acetylcholine have been shown over and over again through beautiful work fromMike Merzenich's lab at UCSF and the Kilgard Lab down in Houston, and a number of other labs, including Norm Weinberger'slab at UC Irvine, again and again, to improve or even directlygate neuroplasticity by increasing focus directly. That's a lot of word soup, but basically what happens is if acetylcholine transmission is increased eventransiently within the brain, there's a greater opportunity for neuroplasticity to take place. And the reason there'sa greater opportunity for neuroplasticity, AKAlearning to take place, is by way of the increased focus that spiking acetylcholine can provide. As I mentioned earlier, there are a number of differentfoods which contain choline, you can look those up online, choline acting as an amino acidprecursor to acetylcholine, but of course, there arecompounds, there are supplements that can further and moreacutely increase acetylcholine, and indeed, I use these myself. The most effective oneI've found is Alpha-GPC. Alpha-GPC consumed at dosages of 300 milligrams to 600 milligrams prior to a work aboutor prior to a workout greatly increase one's abilityto focus and concentrate, at least that's been my experience, and there are some good data in humans. So how would I use Alpha-GPC? I would use Alpha-GPC by takingit about 10 to 20 minutes prior to any time I want to focus or concentrate very deeply. I've taken as much as 600milligrams at one time, although I find that 300milligrams is enough for me, and I tend to be quitesensitive to supplements and caffeine in general, so I'll sometimes takeit alongside yerba mate or with yerba mate or withcoffee prior to a workout or prior to a about of work in which I'm focusing on mental work. So it could be reading, writing, could be math, could be data analysis, could be anything where I need a lot offocus and concentration. Now a number of people have contacted me about a recent studysuggesting that Alpha-GPC when taken chronically over many years could increase one'svulnerability to stroke. I've looked at those dataand my read of the data is that they're not very conclusive, although anytime yousee something like that, a study that's pointing to the fact that a given compound might increase the propensity for stroke, you obviously want to be concerned. So we have to ask ourselveshow, by what mechanism that is, could Alpha-GPC be increasingthe susceptibility to stroke? And it seems to be relatedto increases in TMAO, which is a marker related tothe cardiovascular system. And one known way tooffset increases in TMAO that are associated either with Alpha-GPC or increases due to other things, so ingestion of particular food compounds actually can increase TMAO, is to offset that by taking600 milligrams of garlic. Now I've been taking Alpha-GPC pretty consistently for a number of years. I do not take it every day. I would say I take itabout four days per week, again, prior to workoutsor bouts of cognitive work. I have not seen my TMAO spike and I've evaluated thatby way of blood tests, but nonetheless, I take600 milligrams of garlic in capsule form anytime I eat anyway and I do that for generalcardiovascular function and there's some interesting data on immune system function,et cetera for garlic. So I've been consuming 600milligram capsules of garlic for some period of time. Some days, I'll ingest justone 600 milligram capsule, other times, I'll take two, but based on this recent studyand the concerns about TMAO, I make it a point to always ingest a 600milligram capsule of garlic anytime I take Alpha-GPC, which again for me isabout four days per week. So in our model of attention and focus, you can now clearly seewhy taking Alpha-GPC, which increases acetylcholine transmission would be beneficial forconcentration and focus and why taking it with a double espresso or why taking it with yerba mate would further increaseconcentration and focus because as I mentioned earlier, caffeine is going to increase epinephrine. It's also going to increase the density of dopamine receptors and the Alpha-GPC is goingto increase acetylcholine, this spotlighting for cognition, this ability to reallyamplify the activity of specific neural networks, which is largely what's happening when you're trying to focus and pay attention tosomething specifically. So if one wants to increase

# Tool: L-Tyrosine Supplements & Food
the amount of dopaminetransmission in the brain and body for sake of increasingconcentration and focus, one of the most efficient ways to do that is by ingestion of theamino acid L-tyrosine. Again, L-tyrosine can bederived from food sources, I invite you to look up those various food sources on the web, simply go to a web browser and put in foods that contain a lot of L-tyrosine and you'll get a rich arrayof choices to select from. But in my case, I useL-tyrosine in capsule form. I will take 500 milligrams of L-tyrosine, 300 milligrams of Alpha-GPCand a cup of coffee. I'm careful to do this early in the day, certainly not after two or 3:00 PM because I don't wantto diminish my ability to fall and stay asleep that night. I'll do this early inthe day before a workout or before a about ofconcentrated mental work. Again, I tend to do thisabout four days per week, so certainly not everytime I sit down to do work. And I should also mention

# Combining & Choosing Focus Tools, Variability 
that I still tend to dothe behavioral tools. I'll tend to use fiveminutes of binaural beats or binaural beatsthroughout the work session, sometimes do a ice bathor a cold shower before. I don't want to give the impression that I combine every toolthat I've talked about today for a given workout. I mean, that would be prettywild to take a cold shower, pop an L-tyrosine, take an Alpha-GPC, drink two espresso,listen to binaural beats. That to me seems likea very inefficient way to go about life. In fact, I make it apoint to try and use tools to increase my abilityto concentrate and focus, but not to combine morethan two or three of them at any one time. And when I say two or three, what I mean is I will usesupplements like Alpha-GPC, L-Tyrosine and caffeine togetherbefore certain work bouts, I might use the visual practice of focusing on a givenlocation for a minute before I begin that work about, I might combine those. Then another time Imight take a cold shower prior to doing some work. Other days, I confess,I've slept very well or my enthusiasm about whatI'm about to work on is such that I don't require any of these tools. Again, there's no requirement, there's no pressure touse any of these tools, behavioral, supplement based or otherwise. It's simply a matter of using the tools that are going to allow you to achieve the states you want to achieve and to improve your abilityto go into those states without any help at all. And this is what I find particularly attractive about supplements. It's not so much that they put you into the ideal state for that work and then you accomplish that work and then you always relyon those supplements. I prefer to look at supplements of the sort that I just described as a route into a deeper trenchof focus and concentration that I use as a tool to teach myself to focus and concentrate more deeply, such that I don't need those tools every single time I tryand focus and concentrate. I think this is an important point because I think that manypeople think of supplements as a crutch or a way ofsimply getting into a state for which no other toolwill suffice or replace.

# ADHD Prescriptions, Training Neural Circuits, Maintenance & Reduced Dosage
But in that context, I want to remind you of thelarger context of pharmacology, which is the vast landscape of prescription pharmacology for ADHD, for attention deficithyperactivity disorder. Now I covered thatlandscape in intense detail on the episode on ADHD and focus. And just to summarize, there is of course, Adderall, Ritalin, Vyvanse,Modafinil, Armodafinil, a number of different compounds, all of which generallyincrease dopamine transmission in the brain, so increasing dopamine, and all of which generallyincrease epinephrine, adrenaline transmissionin the brain and body. And many of those compounds have been of tremendous benefit to children and even someadults who suffer from ADHD. So properly prescribed atthe appropriate dosage, those compounds can really help people with clinically diagnosed ADHD. The way they help those peopleis a bit surprising, however. You might think, well theyturn on the brain chemicals that allow those peopleto concentrate and focus. That's true, but they also have the benefit of teaching those braincircuits how to engage. And that's one of the reasonswhy somewhat paradoxically giving a stimulant likeRitalin or Adderall to a kid that legitimately needs it, obviously, you don't want todo this without the oversight and careful evaluation of a psychiatrist, but giving that to akid who has severe ADHD, you would think would makethem more rambunctious, less able to focus andmore distractible overall. After all, Ritalin,Modafinil, Armodafinil, all these things are stimulants. So you take a kid who has attention deficithyperactivity disorder and give them these drugs that increase transmissionof dopamine and epinephrine and you think, wow,it's going to make them even more distractible and hyperactive and indeed, it has the opposite effect. It doesn't necessarilymake them feel calm, but it makes them feelthat they can focus, they really can anchor their attention. And the idea is that it'steaching those neural circuits or those neural circuitsrather are teaching themselves to engage and to focus and concentrate. And the ideal situation is one in which the total dosage of thosecompounds, those drugs, can be reduced over time as those circuits learn to come online through purely behavioral tools. Now oftentimes, there's amaintenance of those drugs over long periods of time, although there is acommon practice nowadays of trying to diminish the dosage overall. That's in the context of ADHDand prescription medication and I acknowledge that a lot,

# Tool: Optimal Order Approaching Focus Tools, Prescriptions & Dependency 
indeed 80% or more of collegestudents say the statistics are using prescription drugs when they are not in fact prescribed those prescription drugs. So basically what I'm saying is there are a lot of people using drugs designed for ADHD and narcolepsy because those drugs will effectively increasefocus and concentration, but I strongly discourage the use of powerful prescription drugs that have not been prescribed to you. First of all, it's illegal. Second of all, it's quite dangerous to hit the acceleratorof those neural circuits with such vigor because it can increase dependency and they can have a numberof other side effects outside the context ofclinically diagnosed and prescribed ADHD medication. But in the context of supplementation, the increase in dopamine,acetylcholine and epinephrine that one can achieve from say500 milligrams of L-tyrosine, 300 milligrams of Alpha-GPCand a cup of coffee is going to be substantially less than one would see for prescription drugs. So you're getting a modest effect that can similarly teachthose brain circuits for focus and concentrationhow to engage better. But as a general backdrop to all of this, I always say and I'llsay it again and again probably until the day I die, which hopefully is a long time from now, but regardless, it'll be the same message, I always believe that behavioraltools should come first, behavioral tools should come first. Then focus on nutrition. In fact, I would saybehavioral and nutrition tools, and of course, get excellent sleep. Then focus on supplementation and then, and only if those are failing to bring your brain and body to the state you need to be in to perform well in schooland work and life, et cetera do I recommend that peoplelean on prescription drugs. Now there's a caveat to that, which is in under conditionslike severe eating disorders, obsessive compulsivedisorder, bipolar disorder, depression where people aretruly at risk of suicide or severe mental health effects or behavioral health effects and they're really at,their lives are at risk and their overall moodand wellbeing is at risk, it's often the case thatpeople cannot access the brain states required to shift themselves purelywith behavioral tools, nutrition, et cetera. So again, for the typical person who's not suffering from one of the psychiatric disorders that I mentioned before orother psychiatric disorders, schizophrenia, et cetera, I strongly encourage you tolook to behavioral tools first, nutrition, then supplementation, then and only if there's a remaining need, to prescription drugs. This contrasts very much with the typical scenarioI hear about these days where college studentsor other people will say, oh yeah, I hear that there's this drug, Ritalin or Vyvanse that canimmediately put me into a state of heightened focus and concentration. Now listen, if you have ADHD, by all means, talk to a physician, talk to a great psychiatrist and figure out whether ornot that's right for you. But if you don't, again, behavioral tools,nutrition, supplementation, and in particular, those behavioral tools are going to be the onesthat are going to allow you to teach your neural circuits how to focus and concentrate better, and I cannot overstatethe importance of that, that the behavioral tools, and to some extent the supplementation combined with behavioral tools really allow you to trainup your neural circuits so that you can focus and concentrate to the depth and thedegree and the duration that's going to best serveyour mental and physical goals.

# Tool: Phenylethylamine & Dopamine
Now there's one other compound that I've used from time totime and that I continue to use in order to increasefocus and concentration and I will use this in combination with the other supplementsI talked about before and that's phenylethylamine. Phenylethylamine is in thedopamine synthesis pathway, so it increases dopamine transmission and tends to function alittle bit differently than L-tyrosine. So every once in a while,I'll swap out L-tyrosine and put in 500 milligramsof phenylethylamine or sometimes, if I really wantto push a little bit harder on the dopamine system, and I'm going to be doing along about of intense work, I will take the 300milligrams of Alpha-GPC, the 500 milligrams of L-tyrosine, I'll generally takethat with some caffeine, and I should mention, I don't go past about 100 or200 milligrams of caffeine 'cause I don't reallylike feeling too jittery, that's not really my goal, it's the goal to be alert, but not so alert that I reallycan't focus on anything, I'm not interested in havingan anxiety attack after all, but I'll sometimes either swap in or I will add that 500milligrams of phenylethylamine. Phenylethylamine is in the PEA pathway. I've talked about this in a previous podcast ondopamine motivation and drive, and it's a very short-lived compound. So what I'll tend to do is take it once at the beginning of the workout and sometimes in themiddle of the workout, I'll take another 500 milligram capsule. But what I just described with combining all of those compounds, Alpha-GPC, L-tyrosine,phenylethylamine and caffeine, that's a fairly rare occurrencethat I'll combine all four and really only under conditions in which I have to do anintensely challenging about of mental or physical work. I would say the frequencyat which I combine all four of those things is probably about once every two weeks, and typically more like once a month, again being careful to do thatin the early part of the day, certainly before the noon hour, so that I am in no waygoing to disrupt my sleep.

# Tool: Other Supplements to Enhance Dopamine, Epinephrine & Acetylcholine 
I realize that many of youare probably wondering about or hoping that I'll discuss things like lions mane or the racetams or some of the other compounds that are known to powerfully modulate the dopamine, epinephrineand acetylcholine systems. To be quite direct, there are far too many of these compounds to review in a single episode, and they all generally tapinto the same set of processes. Again, epinephrine, thatshaft of the arrowhead that we're thinking of as focus, acetylcholine, which isthe arrowhead itself, and then dopamine, which is the sort ofpropeller behind the arrow that allows it tocontinually drive forward through a about ofmental or physical work. There is a wonderful site. I've mentioned it severaltimes before on this podcast. That is examine.com. That wonderful site that is examine.com has recently been updated,they've changed their format. It was terrific before, it provided links to relevant studies, it talked about specific compounds, it talked about the magnitude of effect, it talked about the human effect matrix, it really focused on human studies with links to those studies and on and on. The new revamped version ofexamine.com is even better, it's really next, next level. I really applaud them fordoing such a terrific job in organizing the information. There are a lot of interestingpages that you can read there about different compounds. So you can put in anycompound, ginko biloba, phosphatidylserine, Alpha-GPC, and you're going to get arich array of information about those compounds. And if you were to putin a specific goal state, that is focus or concentrationor sleep or hormones, like testosterone, et cetera, you're going to get a rich array of compounds and supplements as well as links to thestudies on those compounds and some details aboutthose particular studies. It's an absolutely phenomenal site. It's one that I rely onand that I know thousands, if not millions of other people rely on and I encourage you to check it out. Again, the URL is examine.com. So today we've talked abouta number of different tools

# Behavioral, Nutrition & Supplement Tools for Focus
and to some extent, some mechanisms involved in concentration and focus, and really the goalhas been to provide you an understanding of theneurochemical systems and a little bit about the neurocircuits that can allow you to achievestates of attention and focus. In contrast to previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast, where I've covered these topics in tremendous depth asit relates to mechanism and also focused on tools, today, I largely focused on tools. So we talked about behavioral tools, like a meditation that's13 minutes long done daily specifically to improveyour ability to focus, and in fact, there are datato support that it will. We talked about hypnosis, wetalked about visual focus, overt and covert, we talked about various supplements, such as Alpha-GPC,phenylethylamine, L-tyrosine, supplements that I use to directly modulate the neural circuits for concentration and focus. We also talked aboutcreatine and the omega-3s. We talked about the importance of sleep, which modulates our ability to function mentallyand physically overall, so optimize that sleep. And we talked about anumber of other protocols that you can incorporate. My hope in giving you all this information in one single locationis that you'll be able to pick and choose which of these protocols youwould like to incorporate into your attempts to improveyour focus and concentration. Again, I don't recommend doing all of these protocols all at once. What I recommend ispicking a handful of them, maybe one or two, maybe three or four, and trying them in different combinations at different times of dayand for different purposes, for mental work, forphysical work, et cetera, and find what is best for you. Once again, the goalis to teach your brain, that is to increase neuroplasticityin the neural circuits that allow you not just to focus, but to refocus your attention. And I'd be remiss if I didn't mention that it's also criticalto be able to defocus. I highly encourage people totake a period of time each day to daydream, to walk down the hall without looking at your phone, to not have to incorporatemore sensory information, to not place increasingdemands on yourself to focus, and see and realize how having a period of deliberate decompression and defocusing can allow your brainto focus so much better when you do decide to return to a about of focus, concentratedwork or physical work. So I want to thank you forjoining me for this discussion about tools for focus and concentration.

# Zero-Cost Support, YouTube Feedback, Spotify & Apple Reviews, Momentous Supplements, AG1 (Athletic Greens), Instagram, Twitter, Neural Network Newsletter
If you're learning fromand/or enjoying this podcast, please subscribe to our YouTube channel. That's a terrific zerocost way to support us. In addition, pleasesubscribe to the podcast on Spotify and Apple. That's also a zero cost way to support us. And on both Spotify and Apple, you can leave us up to a five star review. If you have questions for usor comments or suggestions or guests that you'd like us to consider bringing onthe Huberman Lab Podcast, please put all that in thecomment section on YouTube, we do read all those comments. Please also check outthe sponsors mentioned at the beginning of today's episode, that's the best way tosupport this podcast. During today's episode andon many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast,we discuss supplements. while supplements aren'tnecessary for everybody, many people derivetremendous benefit from them for things like sleep and enhancing focus and hormone augmentation and so forth. As mentioned at thebeginning of today's episode, the Huberman Lab Podcast is now partnered withMomentous supplements because they are of thevery highest quality, they ship internationally, and they have singleingredient formulations in dosages that will allow you to construct the best, most biologically and cost effective supplementation protocol for your needs. If you're interested in the supplements covered on the Huberman Lab Podcast, you can go to livemomentous,spelled o-u-s, so livemomentous.com/huberman. If you're not alreadyfollowing us on social media, we are hubermanlab on Twitter, and we are also hubermanlab on Instagram. Both places, I talk about scienceand science related tools, some of which overlap withthe contents and topics of the Huberman Lab Podcast, much of which is unique from the contents and it's certainly the format covered on the Huberman Lab Podcast. Again, that's hubermanlab on Instagram and hubermanlab on Twitter. The Huberman Lab Podcast has a newsletter in which we provide summariesand essential protocols from the Huberman Lab Podcast episodes. You can access it totally free of charge by going to hubermanlab.com, go to the menu and click on newsletter, provide your email. We do not share your email with anybody and you'll receive our monthly newsletter. There are also examples ofprevious newsletters there that you can download as PDFs right away without even having to sign up. So thank you once again for joining me for today's discussion all about the mechanismsand especially the tools for enhancing concentration and focus, and last but certainly not least, thank you for your interest in science. [upbeat music]

